-------------------------------------
NWCRG @ IETF-102 (Montreal) - Minutes
-------------------------------------
Thursday, July 19, 2018
Morning session I, 9:30-11:30
Room: Notre Dame

More information: https://datatracker.ietf.org/rg/nwcrg/
Meetecho recording: https://play.conf.meetecho.com/Playout/?session=IETF102-NWCRG-20180719-0930


00- Welcome, administrative and general matters, information for new participants
    (Chairs) (10')

See Chairs Slides: https://datatracker.ietf.org/meeting/102/materials/slides-102-nwcrg-00-chairs-slides-01


PART I: NC building blocks (start: 9:40)
=========================================

01- "BATS codes" (Raymond W. Yeung, remotely)
---------------------------------------------
Slides are in https://datatracker.ietf.org/meeting/102/materials/slides-102-nwcrg-01-yeung-bats-02

 - Q (Dave Oran): what’s the transmission overhead of the code?
 - A: Matrix code with PRNG LNC with small batch size overhead is very small.
 - Q (DaveO): what about congestive losses rather than wireless losses?
 - A: doesn’t matter.
 - Q (Yunfei Zhang, Tencent): is it easy to install? What is the limit on speed/computation?
 - A: with weak CPUs, it can be hard. In case of smart streetlights, we had the luxury of using a computer.
 - A: using a relatively powerful platform to do the network coding computations.
 - Q: NC around for many years but computational cost is high. Do you see any benefits in cellular or 5G?
 - A: BATS codes are an efficient implementation of RLNC that should work well.
 - Marie-Jose: we will have a discussion/draft on implementation issues about RLNC and you're welcome to participate.
   Also deployments exist so ask to the list, people may give concrete information.
 - Q (MJM): chair-hat off: have you looked at ICN approaches for multi-hop communications?
 - A: haven’t looked at it yet.
 - Q (MJM): chair hat on: do you intend to write a draft?
 - A: we're thinking about it. Maybe.


02- Discussion on FEC Scheme, signaling and protocol (Vincent Roca, all)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Slides are in https://datatracker.ietf.org/meeting/102/materials/slides-102-nwcrg-02-roca-fec-signaling-and-protocol-03

 - Q: (DaveO): signaling is an ambiguous term can cover both metadata in the protocol and separate "out of band" stuff
 - A: you're right - let’s be clear about this

Question in agenda: what about draft-heide-nwcrg-rlnc?
------------------------------------------------------

 - A (Kerim Fouli, CodeOn): thanks for comments. We didn't want to make this ID too wide, e.g., no algorithm is specified,
	we mainly focus on the format that we want to be reusable. The question of scope is important and we'll clarify it.
 - C (MJM): please use to the list.
 - Q (Brandon Williams, Akamai): (1) it would be valuable to explore whether a common framing is feasible in this RG.
	(2) Otherwise, if we look at a separate session establishment protocol, would anybody use it? Ask question and evaluate
	whether or not people will use it.
	(3) When we see presentations of individual codes there isn’t commonality in how the benefits and performance are
	evaluated. I suggest to come up with a common framework for evaluating codes.
 - A: Yes concerning the evalation framework. It's in scope. Concerning negotiation of parameters it’s actually a very basic
	approach: it's just a few parameters that are communicated rather than negotiated.
 - Q (DaveO): be careful about using the term "negotiation" when the signaling may not want it.
 - A: yes


03- "Generic API for Sliding Window FEC Codes" (Vincent Roca)
-------------------------------------------------------------
Slides are in https://datatracker.ietf.org/meeting/102/materials/slides-102-nwcrg-03-roca-generic-fec-api-01

 - Q (DaveO): does the API need all this codec description flexibility? Not what the crypto guys did for describing cypher
	suites. They packaged whole sets of options into single code points and limits them to ensure interoperability.
 - A: we need flexibility in the API.
	[Edited: in fact the current codepoint examples comply with DaveO suggestion: a single codepoint packages several
	techniques of the FEC Scheme, but we could perhaps further restrict the use of some API functions (at least by
	suggesting what are the functions likely to be used).]


04- Feedback from TSVWG draft-ietf-tsvwg-fecframe-ext and draft-ietf-tsvwg-rlc-fec-scheme work (Vincent Roca)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Slides are in https://datatracker.ietf.org/meeting/102/materials/slides-102-nwcrg-04-roca-rlc-fecframe-lessons-learned-01

Q (MJM): Kerim, what’s your experience on implementation at CodeOn?
A (Kerim): haven’t looked at it.
Q (Kerim): it would be good to look at benchmarking, having a common benchmarking framework that does not just focus on speed.
A: yes, I fully agree.


Question in Agenda: what about "Network Coding and Congestion Control" topic?
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

 - MJM: this has been pushed out, however this is not going away. Think it’s important. Is anybody ready to contribute?
 - Emmanuel L.: we tried on the list to get feedback on the subject, but we didn’t get anything.
 - MJM: let’s try again? I was also planning to propose a draft on "NC issues for implementation/acceptation", maybe this
	could be tied up together.


PART II: Use-cases for NC (start: 10:40)
========================================

05- "Coding for QUIC" (Ian Swett)
---------------------------------
Slides are in https://datatracker.ietf.org/meeting/102/materials/slides-102-nwcrg-05-swett-coding-for-quic-00
        draft-swett-nwcrg-coding-for-quic / draft-roca-nwcrg-rlc-for-quic

 - Q (DaveO): since streams can be uni-directional or bi-directional, do we need different FEC schemes to reflect it?
	Beyond complexity, this would enable to capture the full design space.
 - A (IS+MJM): It's a good point. You made need two schemes because you don't have the same requirements.
 - Vincent: in FECframe and RMT, we needed an ESI to identify symbols, but with QUIC the stream offset gives you this for free.
 - Q (Brandon): (slide 12) how similar is this format to FECFRAME?
 - A (Vincent): It’s fairly similar: ESI is replaced by Offset, the other Key/DT/NSS 32-bit word is similar.
 - Q (Brandon): how much value is there in applying a single FEC to multiple streams - the silent periods question is entangled
	with how things work when you have a bunch of individually low-rate streams. Just something to keep in mind.

 - IS: Need to update document to conform to QUIC extension mechanisms. Next step is to code this up and try it out.
	Maybe an intern at Google?
 - MJM: will talk to Christian Huitema about working together on this.
 - DaveO: also interactions with multi path - shouldn’t freeze design in ways that we might regret when multi path is done
	in QUIC V2.


06- "Quick status on Network coding and satellites I-D" (Nicolas Kuhn, remotely)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Slides are in https://datatracker.ietf.org/meeting/102/materials/slides-102-nwcrg-06-kuhn-nc-and-satellite-00

 - Vincent: main comment was lack of research challenges in the draft. If you can improve this aspect, it would be useful.
 - Q: (Stuart  Card, Critical Technologies Inc.) Satellites can have reflection attacks to mount DDoS through Negative Acks, so
	security is critical. I'd be happy to have discussion with authors.
- A (MJM): discussion to have on the list as we have ESA specialists for instance.

Question: should draft-kuhn-nwcrg-network-coding-satellites be RG Item?
 - MJM asks if good idea to adopt for RG in the room?
 - A (MJM): nobody complains. We continue on the list.
 - (Nicolas) would love to have security in Satcom covered, but not sure how this interacts with NC.
 - Vincent: there’s the security considerations mandatory section, but it can also be a research topic.
 - (Vincent): who agrees in the room to review it if we adopt it as RG Item?
 - A: three people agree (John + Stuart + Vincent).


Question: what about draft draft-matsuzono-nwcrg-nwc-ccn-reqs?
--------------------------------------------------------------

 - Hitoshi Asaeda: which RG should adopt this NWCRG or ICNRG? In any case it’s important to have a solution.
	We also need to clarify the requirements so it's good timing to adopt it.
 - Cedric Westphal: draft has been iterated, probably ready for RG adoption
 - MJM: we talked to ICN chairs and DaveO is here, one comment is whether there are more people in ICNRG who know about coding
	than in NWCRG who know about ICN. But it has been done before and we can go that way.
 - DaveO (as ICNRG co-Chair): could work well either way. But we don't have a solution to have it shared between two RGs.
	Maybe let Allison (IRTF chair) know and then decide.


07- What's next? (chairs, all) (10')
------------------------------------
    - Discussions on RG Milestones (see Introduction chair slides)
    - Do we need an interim mid-September?
    - Do we plan a hackathon for IETF103  (open-source sliding window FEC codec)?

 - MJM: would like to have an update to Tetris draft and have it RG Item, the same for RLNC.
 - Kerim: yes, we definitely will do that.
 - MJM: initial implementation is planned for QUIC, and we already have two documents "how to do it" and "how to do it with a specific code".
	There could be other FEC Schemes for QUIC.
 - MJM: we already said we would ask the list for adopting as RG Item the "NC for satellite" and "NC for ICN/CCN" drafts.
 - MJM: Want to do work on "NC Adoption Challenges".
 - MJM: We may have an interim (in Boston or in Europe), probably on September 26th. We'll put it on the list to decide.
 - MJM: We will probably have a Hackathon at IETF103.
 - Stuart: 99% people using TCP don't know how it works but think the opposite. We need a "network coding for dummies" document.
	It's really important to have people think they understand how NC works for them to adopt the technology.
 - MJM: we discussed in the past whether to have a "network coded transport” and decided no. We prefer to have NC and transport
	be independent.
 - DaveO: we had horrible experience with parity codes for real-time that broke RTP, so you could either have their stuff running or an RTP
	implementation running. It has finally been solved by DVB who had more power. But it's unfortunate we had it solved 3 years after
	the fact.
 - MJM: start with list discussion about what we think the issues are. It would be interesting to have companies come to the list and
	say what issues they faced. We all think performance improve but at what cost?
 - MJM: Do we need an interim mid-September?
 - A: will ask the list whether and if so where.
 - MJM: Do we plan a hackathon for IETF103  (open-source sliding window FEC codec)?
 - A: seems to be good interest in it. Having a decent API draft is a prerequisite, now it's done we can continue.

